The Myth Of Sisyphus
The gods had condemned Sisyphus to ceaselessly rolling a rock
to the top of a mountain, whence the stone would fall back of its
own weight. They had thought with some reason that there is no
more dreadful punishment than futile and hopeless labor.
If one believes Homer, Sisyphus was the wisest and most
prudent of mortals. According to another tradition, however, he
was disposed to practice the profession of highwayman. I see no
contradiction in this. Opinions differ as to the reasons why he
became the futile laborer of the underworld. To begin with, he is
accused of a certain levity in regard to the gods. He stole their
secrets. AEgina, the daughter of AEsopus, was carried off by
Jupiter. The father was shocked by that disappearance and
complained to Sisyphus. He, who knew of the abduction, offered
to tell about it on condition that AEsopus would give water to the
citadel of Corinth. To the celestial thunderbolts he preferred the
benediction of water. He was punished for this in the underworld.
Homer tells us also that Sisyphus had put Death in chains. Pluto
could not endure the sight of his deserted, silent empire. He
dispatched the god of war, who liberated Death from the hands of
her conqueror.
It is said also that Sisyphus, being near to death, rashly wanted
to test his wife’s love. He ordered her to cast his unburied body
into the middle of the public square. Sisyphus woke up in the
underworld. And there, annoyed by an obedience so contrary to
human love, he obtained from Pluto permission to return to earth in
order to chastise his wife. But when he had seen again the face of
this world, enjoyed water and sun, warm stones and the sea, he no
longer wanted to go back to the infernal darkness. Recalls, signs of
anger, warnings were of no avail. Many years more he lived facing
the curve of the gulf, the sparkling sea, and the smiles of earth. A
decree of the gods was necessary. Mercury came and seized the
impudent man by the collar and, snatching him from his joys, led
him forcibly back to the underworld, where his rock was ready for
him.
You have already grasped that Sisyphus is the absurd hero. He
is, as much through his passions as through his torture. His scorn
of the gods, his hatred of death, and his passion for life won him
that unspeakable penalty in which the whole being is exerted
toward accomplishing nothing. This is the price that must be paid
for the passions of this earth. Nothing is told us about Sisyphus in
the underworld. Myths are made for the imagination to breathe life
into them. As for this myth, one sees merely the whole effort of a
body straining to raise the huge stone, to roll it and push it up a
slope a hundred times over; one sees the face screwed up, the
cheek tight against the stone, the shoulder bracing the clay-covered
mass, the foot wedging it, the fresh start with arms outstretched,
the wholly human security of two earth-clotted hands. At the very
end of his long effort measured by skyless space and time without
depth, the purpose is achieved. Then Sisyphus watches the stone
rush down in a few moments toward that lower world whence he
will have to push it up again toward the summit. He goes back
down to the plain.
It is during that return, that pause, that Sisyphus interests me. A
face that toils so close to stones is already stone itself! I see that
man going back down with a heavy yet measured step toward the
torment of which he will never know the end. That hour like a
breathing-space which returns as surely as his suffering, that is the
hour of consciousness. At each of those moments when he leaves
the heights and gradually sinks toward the lairs of the gods, he is
superior to his fate. He is stronger than his rock.
If this myth is tragic, that is because its hero is conscious.
Where would his torture be, indeed, if at every step the hope of
succeeding upheld him? The workman of today works every day in
his life at the same tasks, and this fate is no less absurd. But it is
tragic only at the rare moments when it becomes conscious.
Sisyphus, proletarian of the gods, powerless and rebellious, knows
the whole extent of his wretched condition: it is what he thinks of
during his descent. The lucidity that was to constitute his torture at
the same time crowns his victory. There is no fate that cannot be
surmounted by scorn.
* * *
If the descent is thus sometimes performed in sorrow, it can
also take place in joy. This word is not too much. Again I fancy
Sisyphus returning toward his rock, and the sorrow was in the
beginning. When the images of earth cling too tightly to memory,
when the call of happiness becomes too insistent, it happens that
melancholy rises in man’s heart: this is the rock’s victory, this is
the rock itself. The boundless grief is too heavy to bear. These are
our nights of Gethsemane. But crushing truths perish from being
acknowledged. Thus, CEdipus at the outset obeys fate without
knowing it. But from the moment he knows, his tragedy begins.
Yet at the same moment, blind and desperate, he realizes that the
only bond linking him to the world is the cool hand of a girl. Then
a tremendous remark rings out: “Despite so many ordeals, my
advanced age and the nobility of my soul make me conclude that
all is well.” Sophocles’ CEdipus, like Dostoevsky’s Kirilov, thus
gives the recipe for the absurd victory. Ancient wisdom confirms
modern heroism.
One does not discover the absurd without being tempted to
write a manual of happiness. “What! by such narrow ways—?”
There is but one world, however. Happiness and the absurd are two
sons of the same earth. They are inseparable. It would be a mistake
to say that happiness necessarily springs from the absurd
discovery. It happens as well that the feeling of the absurd springs
from happiness. “I conclude that all is well,” says CEdipus, and
that remark is sacred. It echoes in the wild and limited universe of
man. It teaches that all is not, has not been, exhausted. It drives out
of this world a god who had come into it with dissatisfaction and a
preference for futile sufferings. It makes of fate a human matter,
which must be settled among men.
All Sisyphus’ silent joy is contained therein. His fate belongs
to him. His rock is his thing. Likewise, the absurd man, when he
contemplates his torment, silences all the idols. In the universe
suddenly restored to its silence, the myriad wondering little voices
of the earth rise up. Unconscious, secret calls, invitations from all
the faces, they are the necessary reverse and price of victory. There
is no sun without shadow, and it is es-sential to know the night.
The absurd man says yes and his effort will henceforth be
unceasing. If there is a personal fate, there is no higher destiny, or
at least there is but one which he concludes is inevitable and
despicable. For the rest, he knows himself to be the master of his
days. At that subtle moment when man glances backward over his
life, Sisyphus returning toward his rock, in that slight pivoting he
contemplates that series of unrelated actions which becomes his
fate, created by him, combined under his memory’s eye and soon
sealed by his death. Thus, convinced of the wholly human origin of
all that is human, a blind man eager to see who knows that the
night has no end, he is still on the go. The rock is still rolling.
I leave Sisyphus at the foot of the mountain! One always finds
one’s burden again. But Sisyphus teaches the higher fidelity that
negates the gods and raises rocks. He too concludes that all is well.
This universe henceforth without a master seems to him neither
sterile nor futile. Each atom of that stone, each mineral flake of
that night-filled mountain, in itself forms a world. The struggle
itself toward the heights is enough to fill a man’s heart. One must
imagine Sisyphus happy.
Appendix: Hope and the Absurd in the Work of Franz Kafka
The whole art of Kafka consists in forcing the reader to reread.
His endings, or his absence of endings, suggest explanations
which, however, are not revealed in clear language but, before they
seem justified, require that the story be reread from another point
of view. Sometimes there is a double possibility of interpretation,
whence appears the necessity for two readings. This is what the
author wanted. But it would be wrong to try to interpret everything
in Kafka in detail. A symbol is always in general and, however
precise its translation, an artist can restore to it only its movement:
there is no word-for-word rendering. Moreover, nothing is harder
to understand than a symbolic work. A symbol always transcends
the one who makes use of it and makes him say in reality more
than he is aware of expressing. In this regard, the surest means of
getting hold of it is not to provoke it, to begin the work without a
preconceived attitude and not to look for its hidden currents. For
Kafka in particular it is fair to agree to his rules, to approach the
drama through its externals and the novel through its form.
At first glance and for a casual reader, they are disturbing
adventures that carry off quaking and dogged characters into
pursuit of problems they never formulate. In The Trial, Joseph K.
is accused. But he doesn’t know of what. He is doubtless eager to
defend himself, but he doesn’t know why. The lawyers find his
case difficult. Meanwhile, he does not neglect to love, to eat, or to
read his paper. Then he is judged. But the courtroom is very dark.
He doesn’t understand much. He merely assumes that he is
condemned, but to what he barely wonders. At times he suspects
just the same, and he continues living. Some time later two well-
dressed and polite gentlemen come to get him and invite him to
follow them. Most courteously they lead him into a wretched
suburb, put his head on a stone, and slit his throat. Before dying the
condemned man says merely: “Like a dog.”
You see that it is hard to speak of a symbol in a tale whose
most obvious quality just happens to be naturalness. But
naturalness is a hard category to understand. There are works in
which the event seems natural to the reader. But there are others
(rarer, to be sure) in which the character considers natural what
happens to him. By an odd but obvious paradox, the more
extraordinary the character’s adventures are, the more noticeable
will be the naturalness of the story: it is in proportion to the
divergence we feel between the strangeness of a man’s life and the
simplicity with which that man accepts it. It seems that this
naturalness is Kafka’s. And, precisely, one is well aware what The
Trial means. People have spoken of an image of the human
condition. To be sure. Yet it is both simpler and more complex. I
mean that the significance of the novel is more particular and more
personal to Kafka. To a certain degree, he is the one who does the
talking, even though it is me he confesses. He lives and he is
condemned. He learns this on the first pages of the novel he is
pursuing in this world, and if he tries to cope with this, he
nonetheless does so without surprise. He will never show sufficient
astonishment at this lack of astonishment. It is by such
contradictions that the first signs of the absurd work are
recognized. The mind projects into the concrete its spiritual
tragedy. And it can do so solely by means of a perpetual paradox
which confers on colors the power to express the void and on daily
gestures the strength to translate eternal ambitions.
Likewise, The Castle is perhaps a theology in action, but it is
first of all the individual adventure of a soul in quest of its grace,
of a man who asks of this world’s objects their royal secret and of
women the signs of the god that sleeps in them. Metamorphosis, in
turn, certainly represents the horrible imagery of an ethic of
lucidity. But it is also the product of that incalculable amazement
man feels at being conscious of the beast he becomes effortlessly.
In this fundamental ambiguity lies Kafka’s secret. These perpetual
oscillations between the natural and the extraordinary, the
individual and the universal, the tragic and the everyday, the
absurd and the logical, are found throughout his work and give it
both its resonance and its meaning. These are the paradoxes that
must be enumerated, the contradictions that must be strengthened,
in order to understand the absurd work.
A symbol, indeed, assumes two planes, two worlds of ideas
and sensations, and a dictionary of correspondences between them.
This lexicon is the hardest thing to draw up. But awaking to the
two worlds brought face to face is tantamount to getting on the trail
of their secret relationships. In Kafka these two worlds are that of
everyday life on the one hand and, on the other, that of
supernatural anxiety.[26] It seems that we are witnessing here an
interminable exploitation of Nietzsche’s remark: “Great problems
are in the street.”
There is in the human condition (and this is a commonplace of
all literatures) a basic absurdity as well as an implacable nobility.
The two coincide, as is natural. Both of them are represented, let
me repeat, in the ridiculous divorce separating our spiritual
excesses and the ephemeral joys of the body. The absurd thing is
that it should be the soul of this body which it transcends so
inordinately. Whoever would like to represent this absurdity must
give it life in a series of parallel contrasts. Thus it is that Kafka
expresses tragedy by the everyday and the absurd by the logical.
An actor lends more force to a tragic character the more careful
he is not to exaggerate it. If he is moderate, the horror he inspires
will be immoderate. In this regard Greek tragedy is rich in lessons.
In a tragic work fate always makes itself felt better in the guise of
logic and naturalness. CEdipus’s fate is announced in advance. It is
decided supernaturally that he will commit the murder and the
incest. The drama’s whole effort is to show the logical system
which, from deduction to deduction, will crown the hero’s
misfortune. Merely to announce to us that uncommon fate is
scarcely horrible, because it is improbable. But if its necessity is
demonstrated to us in the framework of everyday life, society,
state, familiar emotion, then the horror is hallowed. In that revolt
that shakes man and makes him say: “That is not possible,” there is
an element of desperate certainty that “that” can be.
This is the whole secret of Greek tragedy, or at least of one of
its aspects. For there is another which, by a reverse method, would
help us to understand Kafka better. The human heart has a tiresome
tendency to label as fate only what crushes it. But happiness
likewise, in its way, is without reason, since it is inevitable.
Modern man, however, takes the credit for it himself, when he
doesn’t fail to recognize it. Much could be said, on the contrary,
about the privileged fates of Greek tragedy and those favored in
legend who, like Ulysses, in the midst of the worst adventures are
saved from themselves. It was not so easy to return to Ithaca.
What must be remembered in any case is that secret complicity
that joins the logical and the everyday to the tragic. This is why
Samsa, the hero of Metamorphosis, is a traveling salesman. This is
why the only thing that disturbs him in the strange adventure that
makes a vermin of him is that his boss will be angry at his absence.
Legs and feelers grow out on him, his spine arches up, white spots
appear on his belly and—I shall not say that this does not astonish
him, for the effect would be spoiled—but it causes him a “slight
annoyance.” The whole art of Kafka is in that distinction. In his
central work, The Castle, the details of everyday life stand out, and
yet in that strange novel in which nothing concludes and
everything begins over again, it is the essential adventure of a soul
in quest of its grace that is represented. That translation of the
problem into action, that coincidence of the general and the
particular are recognized likewise in the little artifices that belong
to every great creator. In The Trial the hero might have been
named Schmidt or Franz Kafka. But he is named Joseph K. He is
not Kafka and yet he is Kafka. He is an average European. He is
like everybody else. But he is also the entity K. who is the x of this
flesh-and-blood equation.
Likewise, if Kafka wants to express the absurd, he will make
use of consistency. You know the story of the crazy man who was
fishing in a bathtub. A doctor with ideas as to psychiatric
treatments asked him “if they were biting,” to which he received
the harsh reply: “Of course not, you fool, since this is a bathtub.”
That story belongs to the baroque type. But in it can be grasped
quite clearly to what a degree the absurd effect is linked to an
excess of logic. Kafka’s world is in truth an indescribable universe
in which man allows himself the tormenting luxury of fishing in a
bathtub, knowing that nothing will come of it.
Consequently, I recognize here a work that is absurd in its
principles. As for The Trial, for instance, I can indeed say that it is
a complete success. Flesh wins out.
Nothing is lacking, neither the unexpressed revolt (but it is
what is writing), nor lucid and mute despair (but it is what is
creating), nor that amazing freedom of manner which the
characters of the novel exemplify until their ultimate death.
* * *
Yet this world is not so closed as it seems. Into this universe
devoid of progress, Kafka is going to introduce hope in a strange
form. In this regard The Trial and The Castle do not follow the
same direction. They complement each other. The barely
perceptible progression from one to the other represents a
tremendous conquest in the realm of evasion. The Trial propounds
a problem which The Castle, to a certain degree, solves. The first
describes according to a quasi scientific method and without
concluding. The second, to a certain degree, explains. The Trial
diagnoses, and The Castle imagines a treatment. But the remedy
proposed here does not cure. It merely brings the malady back into
normal life. It helps to accept it. In a certain sense (let us think of
Kierkegaard), it makes people cherish it. The Land Surveyor K.
cannot imagine another anxiety than the one that is tormenting
him. The very people around him become attached to that void and
that nameless pain, as if suffering assumed in this case a privileged
aspect. “How I need you,” Frieda says to K. “How forsaken I feel,
since knowing you, when you are not with me.” This subtle
remedy that makes us love what crushes us and makes hope spring
up in a world without issue, this sudden “leap” through which
everything is changed, is the secret of the existential revolution and
of The Castle itself.
Few works are more rigorous in their development than The
Castle. K. is named Land Surveyor to the Castle and he arrives in
the village. But from the village to the Castle it is impossible to
communicate. For hundreds of pages K. persists in seeking his
way, makes every advance, uses trickery and expedients, never
gets angry, and with disconcerting good will tries to assume the
duties entrusted to him. Each chapter is a new frustration. And also
a new beginning. It is not logic, but consistent method. The scope
of that insistence constitutes the work’s tragic quality. When K.
telephones to the Castle, he hears confused, mingled voices, vague
laughs, distant invitations. That is enough to feed his hope, like
those few signs appearing in summer skies or those evening
anticipations which make up our reason for living. Here is found
the secret of the melancholy peculiar to Kafka. The same, in truth,
that is found in Proust’s work or in the landscape of Plotinus: a
nostalgia for a lost paradise. “I become very sad,” says Olga,
“when Barnabas tells me in the morning that he is going to the
Castle: that probably futile trip, that probably wasted day, that
probably empty hope.”
“Probably”—on this implication Kafka gambles his entire
work. But nothing avails; the quest of the eternal here is
meticulous. And those inspired automata, Kafka’s characters,
provide us with a precise image of what we should be if we were
deprived of our distractions[27] and utterly consigned to the
humiliations of the divine.
In The Castle that surrender to the everyday becomes an ethic.
The great hope of K. is to get the Castle to adopt him. Unable to
achieve this alone, his whole effort is to deserve this favor by
becoming an inhabitant of the village, by losing the status of
foreigner that everyone makes him feel. What he wants is an
occupation, a home, the life of a healthy, normal man. He can’t
stand his madness any longer. He wants to be reasonable. He wants
to cast off the peculiar curse that makes him a stranger to the
village. The episode of Frieda is significant in this regard. If he
takes as his mistress this woman who has known one of the
Castle’s officials, this is because of her past. He derives from her
something that transcends him while being aware of what makes
her forever unworthy of the Castle. This makes one think of
Kierkegaard’s strange love for Regina Olsen. In certain men, the
fire of eternity consuming them is great enough for them to burn in
it the very heart of those closest to them. The fatal mistake that
consists in giving to God what is not God’s is likewise the subject
of this episode of The Castle. But for Kafka it seems that this is not
a mistake. It is a doctrine and a “leap.” There is nothing that is not
God’s.
Even more significant is the fact that the Land Surveyor breaks
with Frieda in order to go toward the Barnabas sisters. For the
Barnabas family is the only one in the village that is utterly
forsaken by the Castle and by the village itself. Amalia, the elder
sister, has rejected the shameful propositions made her by one of
the Castle’s officials. The immoral curse that followed has forever
cast her out from the love of God. Being incapable of losing one’s
honor for God amounts to making oneself unworthy of his grace.
You recognize a theme familiar to existential philosophy: truth
contrary to morality. At this point things are far-reaching. For the
path pursued by Kafka’s hero from Frieda to the Barnabas sisters is
the very one that leads from trusting love to the deification of the
absurd. Here again Kafka’s thought runs parallel to Kierkegaard. It
is not surprising that the “Barnabas story” is placed at the end of
the book. The Land Surveyor’s last attempt is to recapture God
through what negates him, to recognize him, not according to our
categories of goodness and beauty, but behind the empty and
hideous aspects of his indifference, of his injustice, and of his
hatred. That stranger who asks the Castle to adopt him is at the end
of his voyage a little more exiled because this time he is unfaithful
to himself, forsaking morality, logic, and intellectual truths in order
to try to enter, endowed solely with his mad hope, the desert of
divine grace.[28]
***
The word “hope” used here is not ridiculous. On the contrary,
the more tragic the condition described by Kafka, the firmer and
more aggressive that hope becomes. The more truly absurd The
Trial is, the more moving and illegitimate the impassioned “leap”
of The Castle seems. But we find here again in a pure state the
paradox of existential thought as it is expressed, for instance, by
Kierkegaard: “Earthly hope must be killed; only then can one be
saved by true hope,” [29]which can be translated: “One has to have
written The Trial to undertake The Castle.”
Most of those who have spoken of Kafka have indeed defined
his work as a desperate cry with no recourse left to man. But this
calls for review. There is hope and hope. To me the optimistic
work of Henri Bordeaux seems peculiarly discouraging. This is
because it has nothing for the discriminating. Malraux’s thought,
on the other hand, is always bracing. But in these two cases neither
the same hope nor the same despair is at issue. I see merely that the
absurd work itself may lead to the infidelity I want to avoid. The
work which was but an ineffectual repetition of a sterile condition,
a lucid glorification ol the ephemeral, becomes here a cradle of
illusions. It explains, it gives a shape to hope. The creator can no
longer divorce himself from it. It is not the tragic game it was to
be. It gives a meaning to the author’s life.
It is strange in any case that works of related inspiration like
those of Kafka, Kierkegaard, or Chestov—those, in short, of
existential novelists and philosophers completely oriented toward
the Absurd and its consequences—should in the long run lead to
that tremendous cry of hope.
They embrace the God that consumes them. It is through
humility that hope enters in. For the absurd of this existence
assures them a little more of supernatural reality. If the course of
this life leads to God, there is an outcome after all. And the
perseverance, the insistence with which Kierkegaard, Chestov, and
Kafka’s heroes repeat their itineraries are a special warrant of the
uplifting power of that certainty.[30]
Kafka refuses his god moral nobility, evidence, virtue,
coherence, but only the better to fall into his arms. The absurd is
recognized, accepted, and man is resigned to it, but from then on
we know that it has ceased to be the absurd. Within the limits of
the human condition, what greater hope than the hope that allows
an escape from that condition? As I see once more, existential
thought in this regard (and contrary to current opinion) is steeped
in a vast hope. The very hope which at the time of early
Christianity and the spreading of the good news inflamed the
ancient world. But in that leap that characterizes all existential
thought, in that insistence, in that surveying of a divinity devoid of
surface, how can one fail to see the mark of a lucidity that
repudiates itself? It is merely claimed that this is pride abdicating
to save itself. Such a repudiation would be fecund. But this does
not change that. The moral value of lucidity cannot be diminished
in my eyes by calling it sterile like all pride. For a truth also, by its
very definition, is sterile. All facts are. In a world where everything
is given and nothing is explained, the fecundity of a value or of a
metaphysic is a notion devoid of meaning.
In any case, you see here in what tradition of thought Kafka’s
work takes its place. It would indeed be intelligent to consider as
inevitable the progression leading from The Trial to The Castle.
Joseph K. and the Land Surveyor K. are merely two poles that
attract Kafka.[31] I shall speak like him and say that his work is
probably not absurd. But that should not deter us from seeing its
nobility and universality. They come from the fact that he managed
to represent so fully the everyday passage from hope to grief and
from desperate wisdom to intentional blindness. His work is
universal (a really absurd work is not universal) to the extent to
which it represents the emotionally moving face of man fleeing
humanity, deriving from his contradictions reasons for believing,
reasons for hoping from his fecund despairs, and calling life his
terrifying apprenticeship in death. It is universal because its
inspiration is religious. As in all religions, man is freed of the
weight of his own life. But if I know that, if I can even admire it, I
also know that I am not seeking what is universal, but what is true.
The two may well not coincide.
This particular view will be better understood if I say that truly
hopeless thought just happens to be defined by the opposite criteria
and that the tragic work might be the work that, after all future
hope is exiled, describes the life of a happy man. The more
exciting life is, the more absurd is the idea of losing it. This is
perhaps the secret of that proud aridity felt in Nietzsche’s work. In
this connection, Nietzsche appears to be the only artist to have
derived the extreme consequences of an aesthetic of the Absurd,
inasmuch as his final message lies in a sterile and conquering
lucidity and an obstinate negation of any supernatural consolation.
The preceding should nevertheless suffice to bring out the
capital importance of Kafka in the framework of this essay. Here
we are carried to the confines of human thought. In the fullest
sense of the word, it can be said that everything in that work is
essential. In any case, it propounds the absurd problem altogether.
If one wants to compare these conclusions with our initial remarks,
the content with the form, the secret meaning of The Castle with
the natural art in which it is molded, K.’s passionate, proud quest
with the everyday setting against which it takes place, then one
will realize what may be its greatness. For if nostalgia is the mark
of the human, perhaps no one has given such flesh and volume to
these phantoms of regret. But at the same time will be sensed what
exceptional nobility the absurd work calls for, which is perhaps not
found here. If the nature of art is to bind the general to the
particular, ephemeral eternity of a drop of water to the play of its
lights, it is even truer to judge the greatness of the absurd writer by
the distance he is able to introduce between these two worlds. His
secret consists in being able to find the exact point where they
meet in their greatest disproportion.
And, to tell the truth, this geometrical locus of man and the
inhuman is seen everywhere by the pure in heart. If Faust and Don
Quixote are eminent creations of art, this is because of the
immeasurable nobilities they point out to us with their earthly
hands. Yet a moment always comes when the mind negates the
truths that those hands can touch. A moment comes when the
creation ceases to be taken tragically; it is merely taken seriously.
Then man is concerned with hope. But that is not his business. His
business is to turn away from subterfuge. Yet this is just what I
find at the conclusion of the vehement proceedings Kafka institutes
against the whole universe. His unbelievable verdict is this hideous
and upsetting world in which the very moles dare to hope.
